                    EUROPEAN
                    COMMISSION




                                            Brussels, 20.5.2020
                                            COM(2020) 380 final




        COMMUNICATION FROM THE COMMISSION TO THE EUROPEAN
     PARLIAMENT, THE COUNCIL, THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL
            COMMITTEE AND THE COMMITTEE OF THE REGIONS

                     EU Biodiversity Strategy for 2030

                     Bringing nature back into our lives




EN                                                                EN

1.     BIODIVERSITY – THE NEED FOR URGENT ACTION

From the world’s great rainforests to small parks and gardens, from the blue whale to
microscopic fungi, biodiversity is the extraordinary variety of life on Earth. We humans
are part of, and fully dependent on, this web of life: it gives us the food we eat, filters the
water we drink, and supplies the air we breathe. Nature is as important for our mental and
physical wellbeing as it is for our society’s ability to cope with global change, health
threats and disasters. We need nature in our lives.

Healthy and resilient societies depend on giving nature the space it needs. The recent
COVID-19 pandemic makes the need to protect and restore nature all the more urgent.
The pandemic is raising awareness of the links between our own health and the health of
ecosystems. It is demonstrating the need for sustainable supply chains and consumption
patterns that do not exceed planetary boundaries. This reflects the fact that the risk of
emergence and spread of infectious diseases increases as nature is destroyed1. Protecting
and restoring biodiversity and well-functioning ecosystems is therefore key to boost our
resilience and prevent the emergence and spread of future diseases.

Investing in nature protection and restoration will also be critical for Europe’s
economic recovery from the COVID-19 crisis. When restarting the economy, it is
crucial to avoid falling back and locking ourselves into damaging old habits. The
European Green Deal – the EU’s growth strategy – will be the compass for our recovery,
ensuring that the economy serves people and society and gives back to nature more than
it takes away. The business case for biodiversity is compelling. Industry and companies
rely on genes, species, and ecosystem services as critical inputs for production, notably
for medicines. Over half of global GDP depends on nature and the services it provides,
with three key economic sectors – construction, agriculture, and food and drink – all
highly dependent on it2.

Biodiversity conservation has potential direct economic benefits for many sectors of the
economy. For example, conserving marine stocks could increase annual profits of the
seafood industry by more than €49 billion, while protecting coastal wetlands could save
the insurance industry around €50 billion annually through reducing flood damage
losses3. The overall benefit/cost ratio of an effective global programme for the
conservation of remaining wild nature worldwide is estimated to be at least 100 to 1 4.
Natural capital investment, including restoration of carbon-rich habitats and climate-
friendly agriculture, is recognised to be among the five most important fiscal recovery
policies, which offer high economic multipliers and positive climate impact5. It will be
important for the EU to tap into this potential to ensure prosperity, sustainability and
resilience in the recovery.



1
     Intergovernmental science-policy Plaform for Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) (2019),
     Summary for policymakers of the global assessment report on biodiversity and ecosystem services of
     the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services, pp. 12-13,
     A.2.
2
     World Economic Forum (2020), Nature Risk Rising: Why the Crisis Engulfing Nature Matters for
     Business and the Economy.
3
     Barbier et al. (2018), How to pay for saving biodiversity.
4
     Balmford et al. (2002), Economic reasons for conserving wild nature.
5
     Hepburn et al. (2020), Will COVID-19 fiscal recovery packages accelerate or retard progress on
     climate change?, Smith School Working Paper 20-02.

                                                       1

Biodiversity is also crucial for safeguarding EU and global food security. Biodiversity
loss threatens our food systems6, putting our food security and nutrition at risk.
Biodiversity also underpins healthy and nutritious diets and improves rural livelihoods
and agricultural productivity7. For instance, more than 75% of global food crop types rely
on animal pollination8.

Despite this urgent moral, economic and environmental imperative, nature is in a state
of crisis. The five main direct drivers of biodiversity loss9 – changes in land and sea use,
overexploitation, climate change, pollution, and invasive alien species – are making
nature disappear quickly. We see the changes in our everyday lives: concrete blocks
rising up on green spaces, wilderness disappearing in front of our eyes, and more species
being put at risk of extinction than at any point in human history. In the last four decades,
global wildlife populations fell by 60% as a result of human activities10. And almost
three quarters of the Earth’s surface have been altered 11, squeezing nature into an ever-
smaller corner of the planet.

The biodiversity crisis and the climate crisis are intrinsically linked. Climate change
accelerates the destruction of the natural world through droughts, flooding and wildfires,
while the loss and unsustainable use of nature are in turn key drivers of climate change.
But just as the crises are linked, so are the solutions. Nature is a vital ally in the fight
against climate change12. Nature regulates the climate, and nature-based solutions13,
such as protecting and restoring wetlands, peatlands and coastal ecosystems, or
sustainably managing marine areas, forests, grasslands and agricultural soils, will be
essential for emission reduction and climate adaptation. Planting trees and deploying
green infrastructure will help us to cool urban areas and mitigate the impact of natural
disasters.

Biodiversity loss and ecosystem collapse are one of the biggest threats facing humanity
in the next decade14. They also threaten the foundations of our economy and the costs of
inaction are high and are anticipated to increase15. The world lost an estimated €3.5-18.5
trillion per year in ecosystem services from 1997 to 2011 owing to land-cover change,
and an estimated €5.5-10.5 trillion per year from land degradation. Specifically,
biodiversity loss results in reduced crop yields and fish catches, increased economic
losses from flooding and other disasters, and the loss of potential new sources of
medicine16.

The EU is ready to show ambition to reverse biodiversity loss, lead the world by example
and by action, and help agree and adopt a transformative post-2020 global framework at
the 15th Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity. This should

6
     World Economic Forum (2020), The Global Risks Report 2020.
7
     Food and Agriculture Organization (2019), State of the World’s Biodiversity for Food and Agriculture.
8
     IPBES (2019), Summary for policymakers, p. 3, A1.
9
     IPBES (2019), Summary for policymakers, pp. 17-19, B.10-B.14; European Environment Agency
     (2019), The European environment – state and outlook 2020.
10
     World Wildlife Fund (2018), Living Planet Report - 2018: Aiming Higher.
11
     IPBES (2019), Summary for policymakers, p. 4, A4.
12
     Idem.
13
     https://ec.europa.eu/research/environment/index.cfm?pg=nbs
14
     World Economic Forum (2020), The Global Risks Report 2020.
15
     Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) (2019), Biodiversity: Finance and
     the Economic and Business Case for Action.
16
     Idem.

                                                        2

build on the headline ambition to ensure that by 2050 all of the world’s ecosystems are
restored, resilient, and adequately protected. The world should commit to the net-gain
principle to give nature back more than it takes. As part of this, the world should commit
to no human-induced extinction of species, at minimum where avoidable.

This strategy sets out how Europe can help make this happen. As a milestone, it aims to
ensure that Europe's biodiversity will be on the path to recovery by 2030 for the
benefit of people, the planet, the climate and our economy, in line with the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and with the objectives of the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change. It addresses the five main drivers of biodiversity loss, sets out an enhanced
governance framework to fill remaining gaps, ensures the full implementation of EU
legislation, and pulls together all existing efforts. This strategy is enterprising and
incentivising in spirit and action. It reflects the fact that protecting and restoring nature
will need more than regulation alone. It will require action by citizens, businesses,
social partners and the research and knowledge community, as well as strong
partnerships between local, regional, national and European level. This strategy is in line
with the ambitions and commitment set out in President von der Leyen’s Political
Guidelines and in the European Green Deal.

Adopted in the heart of the COVID-19 pandemic, this strategy will also be a central
element of the EU’s recovery plan. It will be crucial to prevent and build resilience to
future zoonosis outbreaks and to provide immediate business and investment
opportunities for restoring the EU’s economy.

All new initiatives and proposals will be underpinned by the Commission’s better
regulation tools. Based on public consultations and on the identification of the
environmental, social and economic impacts, impact assessments will contribute to
ensuring that all initiatives achieve their objectives in the most effective and least
burdensome way and live up to a green oath to “do no harm”.

2.     PROTECTING AND RESTORING NATURE IN THE EUROPEAN UNION

The EU has legal frameworks, strategies and action plans to protect nature and restore
habitats and species. But protection has been incomplete, restoration has been small-
scale, and the implementation and enforcement of legislation has been insufficient17.

To put biodiversity on the path to recovery by 2030, we need to step up the protection
and restoration of nature. This should be done by improving and widening our network
of protected areas and by developing an ambitious EU Nature Restoration Plan.

                 2.1.     A coherent network of protected areas

Biodiversity fares better in protected areas. However, the current network of legally
protected areas, including those under strict protection, is not sufficiently large to
safeguard biodiversity. Evidence shows that the targets defined under the Convention on
Biological Diversity are insufficient to adequately protect and restore nature18. Global

17
     Mid-term review of the EU Biodiversity Strategy to 2020 (COM(2015) 478 and SWD(2015) 187);
     Fitness Check of the EU Nature Legislation (Birds and Habitats Directives) (SWD(2016) 472); Fitness
     Check of the EU Water Legislation (SWD(2019) 439).
18
     The global Aichi biodiversity targets are that protected areas should cover 17% on land and 10% at sea,
     while scientific studies’ figures range from 30% to 70%. See e.g. IPBES 2019.

                                                         3

efforts are needed and the EU itself needs to do more and better for nature and build a
truly coherent Trans-European Nature Network.

Enlarging protected areas is also an economic imperative. Studies on marine systems
estimate that every euro invested in marine protected areas would generate a return of at
least €319. Similarly, the Nature Fitness Check20 showed that the benefits of Natura 2000
are valued at between €200-300 billion per year. The investment needs of the network are
expected to support as many as 500,000 additional jobs21.

For the good of our environment and our economy, and to support the EU’s recovery
from the COVID-19 crisis, we need to protect more nature. In this spirit, at least 30% of
the land and 30% of the sea should be protected in the EU. This is a minimum of an
extra 4% for land and 19% for sea areas as compared to today22. The target is fully in line
with what is being proposed23 as part of the post-2020 global biodiversity framework
(see Section 4).

Within this, there should be specific focus on areas of very high biodiversity value or
potential. These are the most vulnerable to climate change and should be granted special
care in the form of strict protection24. Today, only 3% of land and less than 1% of marine
areas are strictly protected in the EU. We need to do better to protect these areas. In this
spirit, at least one third of protected areas – representing 10% of EU land and 10% of
EU sea – should be strictly protected. This is also in line with the proposed global
ambition.

As part of this focus on strict protection, it will be crucial to define, map, monitor and
strictly protect all the EU’s remaining primary and old-growth forests25. It will also
be important to advocate for the same globally and ensure that EU actions do not result in
deforestation in other regions of the world. Primary and old-growth forests are the richest
forest ecosystems that remove carbon from the atmosphere, while storing significant
carbon stocks. Significant areas of other carbon-rich ecosystems, such as peatlands,
grasslands, wetlands, mangroves and seagrass meadows should also be strictly protected,
taking into account projected shifts in vegetation zones.

Member States will be responsible for designating the additional protected and strictly
protected areas26. Designations should either help to complete the Natura 2000 network
or be under national protection schemes. All protected areas will need to have clearly
defined conservation objectives and measures. The Commission, working with Member

19
     Brander et al. (2015), The benefits to people of expanding Marine Protected Areas.
20
     Fitness Check of the EU Nature Legislation (SWD(2016) 472).
21
     Member States’ Prioritised Action Frameworks 2020; Mutafoglu et al. (2017), Natura 2000 and Jobs:
     Scoping Study.
22
     Latest EU-27 statistics (European database of nationally designated protected areas) v. 2019, and
     Natura 2000 dataset ‘end 2018’. Today, 26% of the EU’s land area is already protected, with 18% as
     part of Natura 2000 and 8% under national schemes. Of EU seas, 11% are protected, with 8% in Natura
     2000 and 3% under additional national protection. To note: offshore wind projects will be possible if in
     compliance with relevant environmental and nature protection legislation.
23
     Zero draft of the post-2020 global biodiversity framework (CBD/WG2020/2/3), available at
     https://www.cbd.int/conferences/post2020/wg2020-02/documents.
24
     Strict protection does not necessarily mean the area is not accessible to humans, but leaves natural
     processes essentially undisturbed to respect the areas’ ecological requirements.
25
     https://www.cbd.int/forest/definitions.shtml; Natura 2000 and Forests.
26
     Additional Natura 2000 designations will be implemented with support from EU funds and
     enforcement as appropriate.

                                                          4

States and the European Environment Agency, will put forward in 2020 criteria and
guidance for identifying and designating additional areas, including a definition of strict
protection, as well as for appropriate management planning. In doing so, it will indicate
how other effective area-based conservation measures and greening of cities could
contribute to the targets.

The targets relate to the EU as a whole and could be broken down according to the EU
bio-geographical regions and sea basins or at a more local level. Every Member State
will have to do its fair share of the effort based on objective ecological criteria,
recognising that each country has a different quantity and quality of biodiversity.
Particular focus will be placed on protecting and restoring the tropical and sub-tropical
marine and terrestrial ecosystems in the EU’s outermost regions given their exceptionally
high biodiversity value.

In addition, in order to have a truly coherent and resilient Trans-European Nature
Network, it will be important to set up ecological corridors to prevent genetic isolation,
allow for species migration, and maintain and enhance healthy ecosystems. In this
context, investments in green and blue infrastructure27 and cooperation across borders
among Member States should be promoted and supported, including through the
European Territorial Cooperation.

The Commission will aim to agree the criteria and guidance for additional designations
with Member States by the end of 2021. Member States will then have until the end of
2023 to demonstrate significant progress in legally designating new protected areas and
integrating ecological corridors. On this basis, the Commission will assess by 2024
whether the EU is on track to meet its 2030 targets or whether stronger actions, including
EU legislation, are needed.

Finally, the Overseas Countries and Territories also host important biodiversity
hotspots, not governed by EU environmental rules. The Commission encourages relevant
Member States to consider promoting equal or equivalent rules in these countries and
territories.

                         Nature protection: key commitments by 2030

1. Legally protect a minimum of 30% of the EU’s land area and 30% of the EU’s sea
   area and integrate ecological corridors, as part of a true Trans-European Nature
   Network.
2. Strictly protect at least a third of the EU’s protected areas, including all remaining EU
   primary and old-growth forests.
3. Effectively manage all protected areas, defining clear conservation objectives and
   measures, and monitoring them appropriately.




27
     Guidance on a strategic framework for further supporting the deployment of EU-level green and blue
     infrastructure (SWD(2019) 193).

                                                       5

                2.2.    An EU Nature Restoration Plan: restoring ecosystems across
                        land and sea

Protecting the nature we have will not be enough to bring nature back into our lives. To
reverse biodiversity loss, the world needs to be more ambitious on nature restoration.
With a new EU Nature Restoration Plan, Europe will lead the way.

The plan will help improve the health of existing and new protected areas, and bring
diverse and resilient nature back to all landscapes and ecosystems. This means reducing
pressures on habitats and species, and ensuring all use of ecosystems is sustainable. It
also means supporting the recovery of nature, limiting soil sealing and urban sprawl, and
tackling pollution and invasive alien species. The plan will create jobs, reconcile
economic activities with nature growth and help ensure the long-term productivity and
value of our natural capital.

              2.2.1. Strengthening the EU legal framework for nature restoration

Nature restoration is already partially required from the Member States in existing EU
legislation28. However, significant implementation and regulatory gaps hinder
progress. For instance, there is no requirement for Member States to have biodiversity
restoration plans. There are not always clear or binding targets and timelines and no
definition or criteria on restoration or on the sustainable use of ecosystems. There is also
no requirement to comprehensively map, monitor or assess ecosystem services, health or
restoration efforts. These issues are exacerbated by the gaps in implementation that
prevent the existing legislation from achieving its objectives29. Stronger implementation
support and enforcement is required. To ensure that nature restoration across land and sea
picks up, increases the EU’s resilience, and contributes to climate change mitigation and
adaptation as a key nature-based solution, this strategy puts forward two strands of
actions:

         Firstly, and subject to an impact assessment, the Commission will put forward a
          proposal for legally binding EU nature restoration targets in 2021 to restore
          degraded ecosystems, in particular those with the most potential to capture and
          store carbon and to prevent and reduce the impact of natural disasters. This will
          identify the conditions in which the targets must be met, as well as the most
          effective measures to reach them. The impact assessment will also look at the
          possibility of an EU-wide methodology to map, assess and achieve good
          condition of ecosystems so they can deliver benefits such as climate regulation,
          water regulation, soil health, pollination and disaster prevention and protection.

         In that context, the Commission will request and support Member States to raise
          the level of implementation of existing legislation within clear deadlines. It will
          in particular request Member States to ensure no deterioration in conservation
          trends and status of all protected habitats and species by 203030. In addition,
          Member States will have to ensure that at least 30% of species and habitats not

28
     Notably the EU Birds Directive (2009/147/EC), Habitats Directive (92/43/EEC), Water Framework
     Directive (2000/60/EC), Floods Directive (2007/60/EC) and Marine Strategy Framework Directive
     (2008/56/EC).
29
     See Fitness Check of the EU Nature Legislation (SWD(2016) 472) and Fitness Check of the EU Water
     Legislation (SWD(2019) 439). See also below, Section 3.2.
30
     Habitats and species listed under the Birds and Habitats Directives.

                                                      6

          currently in favourable status are in that category or show a strong positive trend.
          The Commission and the European Environmental Agency will provide guidance
          to Member States in 2020 on how to select and prioritise species and habitats.

               2.2.2. Bringing nature back to agricultural land

As guardians of our land, farmers play a vital role in preserving biodiversity. They are
among the first to feel the consequences when biodiversity is lost but also among the first
to reap the benefits when it is restored. Biodiversity enables them to provide us with safe,
sustainable, nutritious and affordable food and provides them with the income they
need to thrive and develop. European farmers are an essential part of the EU’s future and
must continue to be the social and economic hub of many communities across our Union.

At the same time, certain agricultural practices are a key driver of biodiversity decline.
This is why it is important to work with farmers to support and incentivise the
transition to fully sustainable practices. Improving the condition and diversity of
agroecosystems will increase the sector’s resilience to climate change, environmental
risks and socioeconomic shocks, while creating new jobs, for example in organic
farming, rural tourism or recreation.

To support the long-term sustainability of both nature and farming, this strategy will
work in tandem with the new Farm to Fork Strategy and the new Common
Agricultural Policy (CAP), including by promoting eco-schemes and result-based
payment schemes. In implementing the Biodiversity and the Farm to Fork Strategies, the
Commission will closely monitor progress and improvements in terms of food security
and farmers income. The Commission will ensure that the CAP Strategic plans are
assessed against robust climate and environmental criteria, and that Member States set
explicit national values for the relevant targets set in this strategy, as well as in the Farm
to Fork Strategy. These plans should lead to sustainable practices such as precision
agriculture, organic farming, agro-ecology, agro-forestry, low-intensive permanent
grassland, and stricter animal welfare standards.

Farmland birds and insects, particularly pollinators, are key indicators of the health of
agroecosystems and are vital for agricultural production and food security. Their
alarming decline must be reversed. As set out in the Farm to Fork Strategy, the
Commission will take action to reduce by 50% the overall use of – and risk from –
chemical pesticides by 2030 and reduce by 50% the use of more hazardous pesticides
by 2030. This must be supported by the full implementation of the EU Pollinators
initiative31. By the end of 2020, the Commission will review the initiative and propose
additional measures if necessary. To provide space for wild animals, plants, pollinators
and natural pest regulators, there is an urgent need to bring back at least 10% of
agricultural area under high-diversity landscape features. These include, inter alia,
buffer strips, rotational or non-rotational fallow land, hedges, non-productive trees,
terrace walls, and ponds. These help enhance carbon sequestration, prevent soil erosion
and depletion, filter air and water, and support climate adaptation. In addition, more
biodiversity often helps lead to more agricultural production. Member States will need to
translate the 10% EU target to a lower geographical scale to ensure connectivity among
habitats, especially through the CAP instruments and CAP Strategic Plans, in line with
the Farm to Fork Strategy, and through the implementation of the Habitats Directive. The

31
     EU Pollinators initiative (COM(2018) 395).

                                                  7

progress towards the target will be under constant review, and adjustment if needed, to
mitigate against undue impact on biodiversity, food security and farmers’
competitiveness.

Agroecology can provide healthy food while maintaining productivity, increase soil
fertility and biodiversity, and reduce the footprint of food production. Organic farming in
particular holds great potential for farmers and consumers alike. The sector creates jobs
and attracts young farmers. Organic farming also provides 10-20 % more jobs per hectare
than conventional farms, and creates added value for agricultural products 32. To make the
most of this potential, at least 25% of the EU’s agricultural land must be organically
farmed by 2030. In addition to CAP measures, the Commission will put forward an
Action Plan on organic farming, helping Member States stimulate both supply and
demand of organic products. It will also ensure consumer’s trust through promotion
campaigns and green public procurement. In the implementation of the EU-wide agro-
ecological targets set out in this strategy and in the Farm to Fork Strategy, the different
starting points and differences in progress already made in Member States will be taken
into account.

The uptake of agroforestry support measures under rural development should be
increased as it has great potential to provide multiple benefits for biodiversity, people and
climate.

The decline of genetic diversity must also be reversed, including by facilitating the use
of traditional varieties of crops and breeds. This would also bring health benefits through
more varied and nutritious diets. The Commission is considering the revision of
marketing rules for traditional crop varieties in order to contribute to their conservation
and sustainable use. The Commission will also take measures to facilitate the registration
of seed varieties, including for organic farming, and to ensure easier market access for
traditional and locally adapted varieties.

              2.2.3. Addressing land take and restoring soil ecosystems

Soil is one of the most complex of all ecosystems. It is a habitat in its own right, and
home to an incredible diversity of organisms that regulate and control key ecosystem
services such as soil fertility, nutrient cycling and climate regulation. Soil is a hugely
important non-renewable resource, vital for human and economic health, as well as the
production of food and new medications.

In the EU, the degradation of soil is having considerable environmental and economic
consequences. Poor land management, such as deforestation, overgrazing, unsustainable
farming and forestry practices, construction activities and land sealing are among the
main causes of this situation33. Despite recent reductions in the pace of soil sealing,
fertile soils continue to be lost to land take and urban sprawl34. When compounded by




32
     OECD (2016), Farm Management Practices to Foster Green Growth.
33
     European Environment Agency (2019), EEA Signals 2019: Land and Soil in Europe.
34
     European Environment Agency and Swiss Federal Office for the Environment (FOEN) (2016), Urban
     sprawl in Europe.

                                                    8

climate change, the effects of erosion and losses of soil organic carbon are becoming
increasingly apparent. Desertification is also a growing threat in the EU35.

It is therefore essential to step up efforts to protect soil fertility, reduce soil erosion and
increase soil organic matter. This should be done by adopting sustainable soil
management practices, including as part of the CAP. Significant progress is also needed
on identifying contaminated soil sites, restoring degraded soils, defining the conditions
for their good ecological status, introducing restoration objectives, and improving the
monitoring of soil quality.

To address these issues in a comprehensive way and help to fulfil EU and international
commitments on land-degradation neutrality, the Commission will update the EU Soil
Thematic Strategy36 in 2021. The Zero Pollution Action Plan for Air, Water and Soil
that the Commission will adopt in 2021 will also look at these issues. Soil sealing and
rehabilitation of contaminated brownfields will be addressed in the upcoming Strategy
for a Sustainable Built Environment. A mission in the area of soil health and food
under Horizon Europe37 will aim to develop solutions for restoring soil health and
functions.

               2.2.4. Increasing the quantity of forests and improving their health and
                      resilience

Forests are hugely important for biodiversity, climate and water regulation, the provision
of food, medicines and materials, carbon sequestration and storage, soil stabilisation and
the purification of air and water. They are also a natural home for recreation and learning
about nature. Foresters have a key role to play in ensuring sustainable forest management
and in restoring and sustaining biodiversity in forests.

In addition to strictly protecting all remaining EU primary and old-growth forests, the
EU must increase the quantity, quality and resilience of its forests, notably against
fires, droughts, pests, diseases and other threats likely to increase with climate change.
To retain their function for both biodiversity and climate, all forests need to be preserved
in good health. More resilient forests can support a more resilient economy. They also
play an important role in providing materials, products and services, which are key for
the circular bio-economy.

To make this happen, the Commission will propose a dedicated EU Forest Strategy in
2021 in line with our wider biodiversity and climate neutrality ambitions. It will include
a roadmap for planting at least 3 billion additional trees in the EU by 2030, in full
respect of ecological principles. This will create substantial job opportunities linked to
the collecting and cultivating of seeds, planting seedlings, and ensuring their
development. Tree planting is particularly beneficial in cities, while in rural areas it can
work well with agroforestry, landscape features and increased carbon sequestration. At
the same time, the Commission will continue to work with Member States to ensure that
the EU is sufficiently equipped to prevent and respond to major forest fires, which can
inflict significant damages on forest biodiversity.


35
     European Court of Auditors (2018), Combating desertification in the EU: a growing threat in need of
     more action, Special Report n°33/2018.
36
     Thematic Strategy for Soil Protection (COM(2006) 231).
37
     Horizon Europe mission area on soil health and food.

                                                       9

Afforestation, reforestation and tree planting to support biodiversity and ecosystem
restoration will be promoted through the CAP Strategic Plans, and the Cohesion Policy
funds. The new European Urban Greening Platform38 will also facilitate urban tree
planting, including under the LIFE programme.

The share of forest areas covered by management plans should cover all managed public
forests and an increased number of private forests, and biodiversity-friendly practices
such as closer-to-nature-forestry should continue and be further developed. To support
this, the Commission will develop guidelines on biodiversity-friendly afforestation and
reforestation and closer-to-nature-forestry practices. This will be done in parallel with the
new EU Forest Strategy.

To gain a better picture of the health of European forests, the Commission will work with
other data providers to further develop the Forest Information System for Europe. This
will help produce up-to-date assessments of the condition of European forests and link all
EU forest-data web-platforms. This will also be presented as part of the EU Forest
Strategy.

               2.2.5. Win-win solutions for energy generation

Decarbonising the energy system is critical for climate neutrality, as well as for the EU’s
recovery from the COVID-19 crisis and long-term prosperity. More sustainably sourced
renewable energy will be essential to fight climate change and biodiversity loss. The EU
will prioritise solutions such as ocean energy, offshore wind, which also allows for fish
stock regeneration, solar-panel farms that provide biodiversity-friendly soil cover, and
sustainable bioenergy.

To mitigate climate and environmental risks created by the increasing use of certain
sources for bioenergy, the revised Renewable Energy Directive39 includes strengthened
sustainability criteria. It also promotes the shift to advanced biofuels based on residues
and non-reusable and non-recyclable waste. This approach should continue for all forms
of bioenergy. The use of whole trees and food and feed crops for energy production –
whether produced in the EU or imported – should be minimised.

To better understand and monitor the potential climate and biodiversity risks, the
Commission is assessing the EU and global biomass supply and demand and related
sustainability40. As part of its increased ambition to protect and restore forest ecosystems,
the Commission will publish the results of this work on the use of forest biomass for
energy production by the end of 2020. This will inform the Commission’s policy-
making, including the review and revision, where necessary, of the level of ambition of
the Renewable Energy Directive, the Emissions Trading Scheme, and the Regulation on
land use, land use change and forestry (LULUCF) set for 2021.

In line with the Renewable Energy Directive, the Commission will also develop
operational guidance in 2021 on the new sustainability criteria on forest biomass for




38
     See Section 2.2.8.
39
     Directive (EU) 2018/2001 on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources.
40
     JRC Biomass Assessment Study.

                                                       10

energy41. It will also review in 2021 the data on biofuels with high indirect land-use
change risk and establish a trajectory for their gradual phase out by 2030.

The overall objective is to ensure that EU regulatory framework on bioenergy is in line
with the increased ambition set out in the European Green Deal.

              2.2.6. Restoring the good environmental status of marine ecosystems

Restored and properly protected marine ecosystems bring substantial health, social
and economic benefits to coastal communities and the EU as a whole. The need for
stronger action is all the more acute as marine and coastal ecosystem biodiversity loss is
severely exacerbated by global warming42.

Achieving good environmental status of marine ecosystems, including through strictly
protected areas, must involve the restoration of carbon-rich ecosystems as well as
important fish spawning and nursery areas. Some of today’s sea uses endanger food
security, fishers’ livelihoods, and the fishery and seafood sectors. Marine resources
must be harvested sustainably and there must be zero-tolerance for illegal practices.
In this regard, the full implementation of the EU’s Common Fisheries Policy, the Marine
Strategy Framework Directive and the Birds and Habitats Directives is essential.

The application of an ecosystem-based management approach under EU legislation43 will
reduce the adverse impacts of fishing, extraction and other human activities, especially
on sensitive species and seabed habitats. To support this, national maritime spatial
plans, which Member States have to deliver in 2021, should aim at covering all maritime
sectors and activities, as well as area-based conservation-management measures.44 The
Commission will also propose a new action plan to conserve fisheries resources and
protect marine ecosystems by 2021. Where necessary, measures will be introduced to
limit the use of fishing gear most harmful to biodiversity, including on the seabed. It will
also look at how to reconcile the use of bottom-contacting fishing gear with biodiversity
goals, given it is now the most damaging activity to the seabed. This must be done in a
fair and just way for all. The European Maritime and Fisheries Fund should also support
the transition to more selective and less damaging fishing techniques.

Healthy fish stocks are key to the long-term prosperity of fishermen and the health of our
oceans and biodiversity. This makes it all the more important to maintain or reduce
fishing mortality at or under Maximum Sustainable Yield levels. This will help achieve
a healthy population age and size distribution for fish stocks.

The by-catch of species threatened with extinction must also be eliminated or reduced
to a level that allows full recovery. This should also be the case for those in bad
conservation status or not in good environmental status. Furthermore, the by-catch of
other species45 must be eliminated or, where this is not possible, minimised so as not to


41
     Article 29 of the EU Renewable Energy Directive 2018/2001.
42
     See for example Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2019), Special Report on the Ocean and
     the Cryosphere in a Changing Climate.
43
     The Common Fisheries Policy, the Marine Strategy Framework Directive (2008/56/EC) and the
     Maritime Spatial Planning Directive (2014/89/EU).
44
     The Commission will report on the implementation of the Maritime Spatial Planning Directive by
     March 2022 at the latest, including the application of ecosystem-based management.
45
     Protected by international and EU law.

                                                      11

threaten their conservation status. To support this, data collection on by-catch for all
sensitive species needs to be stepped up.

In addition, fisheries-management measures must be established in all marine protected
areas according to clearly defined conservation objectives and on the basis of the best
available scientific advice.

               2.2.7. Restoring freshwater ecosystems

The EU’s legal framework on water is ambitious but implementation is lagging behind
and enforcement must be stepped up46. Greater efforts are needed to restore freshwater
ecosystems and the natural functions of rivers in order to achieve the objectives of the
Water Framework Directive. This can be done by removing or adjusting barriers that
prevent the passage of migrating fish and improving the flow of water and sediments. To
help make this a reality, at least 25,000 km of rivers will be restored into free-flowing
rivers by 203047 through the removal of primarily obsolete barriers and the restoration of
floodplains and wetlands. Technical guidance and support to the Member States to
identify sites and help mobilise funding will be provided by the Commission in 2021, in
consultation with all relevant authorities48. Member State authorities should review water
abstraction and impoundment permits to implement ecological flows in order to achieve
good status or potential of all surface waters and good status of all groundwater by 2027
at the latest, as required by the Water Framework Directive49. To that effect, the
Commission will provide technical support to Member States on their measures by 2023.

Overall, large-scale river and floodplain restoration investments50 can provide a major
economic boost for the restoration sector and for local socioeconomic activities such as
tourism and recreation. At the same time, these investments can improve water
regulation, flood protection, nursery habitats for fish, and the removal of nutrient
pollution.

               2.2.8. Greening urban and peri-urban areas

Green urban spaces, from parks and gardens to green roofs and urban farms, provide a
wide range of benefits for people. They also provide opportunities for businesses and a
refuge for nature. They reduce air, water and noise pollution, provide protection from
flooding, droughts and heat waves, and maintain a connection between humans and
nature51.

The recent lockdowns due to the COVID-19 pandemic have shown us the value of green
urban spaces for our physical and mental wellbeing. While protection of some urban



46
     Fitness Check of the EU Water Legislation (SWD(2019) 439); Evaluation of the Urban Waste Water
     Treatment Directive (SWD(2019) 700).
47
     The target of 25,000 km is based on the Commission’s assessment of what is achievable in the EU by
     2030.
48
     The guidelines will take a wide range of issues into account, including hydropower generation, flood
     management, water supply, agriculture and navigability.
49
     These measures should be planned in the 3rd River Basin Management Plans to be adopted by Member
     States in 2021, under the Water Framework Directive.
50
     Fitness Check of the EU Water Legislation (SWD(2019) 439).
51
     EnRoute project.

                                                       12

green spaces has increased52, green spaces often lose out in the competition for land as
the share of the population living in urban areas continues to rise.

This strategy aims to reverse these trends and stop the loss of green urban ecosystems.
The promotion of healthy ecosystems, green infrastructure and nature-based solutions
should be systematically integrated into urban planning, including in public spaces,
infrastructure, and the design of buildings and their surroundings.

To bring nature back to cities and reward community action, the Commission calls on
European cities of at least 20,000 inhabitants to develop ambitious Urban Greening
Plans by the end of 2021. These should include measures to create biodiverse and
accessible urban forests, parks and gardens; urban farms; green roofs and walls; tree-
lined streets; urban meadows; and urban hedges. They should also help improve
connections between green spaces, eliminate the use of pesticides, limit excessive
mowing of urban green spaces and other biodiversity harmful practices. Such plans could
mobilise policy, regulatory and financial tools.

To facilitate this work, the Commission will in 2021 set up an EU Urban Greening
Platform, under a new ‘Green City Accord’53 with cities and mayors. This will be done
in close coordination with the European Covenant of Mayors. The Urban Greening Plans
will have a central role in choosing the European Green Capital 2023 and European
Green Leaf 2022.

The Commission will support Member States and local and regional authorities through
technical guidance and help to mobilise funding and capacity building. It will also reflect
these objectives in the European Climate Pact.

               2.2.9. Reducing pollution

Pollution is a key driver of biodiversity loss and has a harmful impact on our health and
environment. While the EU has a solid legal framework in place to reduce pollution,
greater efforts are still required. Biodiversity is suffering from the release of nutrients,
chemical pesticides, pharmaceuticals, hazardous chemicals, urban and industrial
wastewater, and other waste including litter and plastics. All of these pressures must be
reduced.

As part of the Commission’s Zero Pollution Ambition for a toxic-free environment, a
new EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability will be put forward along with a Zero
Pollution Action Plan for Air, Water and Soil.

The Commission will also promote the goal of zero pollution from nitrogen and
phosphorus flows from fertilisers through reducing nutrient losses by at least 50%, while
ensuring that there is no deterioration in soil fertility. This will result in the reduction of
use of fertilisers by at least 20%. This will be achieved by implementing and enforcing
the relevant environmental and climate legislation in full, identifying with Member States
the nutrient load reductions needed to achieve these goals, applying balanced fertilisation
and sustainable nutrient management, and by managing nitrogen and phosphorus better
throughout their lifecycle. To this end, the Commission will work with Member States to

52
     There are 11,000 Natura 2000 sites within, or partly within, cities, representing 15% of the total area of
     the Natura 2000 network.
53
     The Green City Accord.

                                                          13

develop an Integrated Nutrient Management Action Plan in 2022. The Farm to Fork
strategy will address the reduction in the use and risk of pesticides and support wider
implementation of Integrated Pest Management54. As part of this, the environmental
risk assessment of pesticides will be strengthened. The pressure from plastics is
notably addressed through the implementation of the European Strategy for Plastics55 and
the new Circular Economy Action Plan56.

The Commission will develop a set of indicators for the progressive reduction of
pollution, and will establish baselines to help monitor progress. Pressures from marine
litter and underwater noise are being addressed under the Marine Strategy Framework
Directive.

               2.2.10. Addressing invasive alien species

Invasive alien species can significantly undermine efforts to protect and restore nature.
Besides inflicting major damage to nature and the economy, many invasive alien species
also facilitate the outbreak and spread of infectious diseases, posing a threat to humans
and wildlife57. The rate of release of invasive alien species has increased in recent years.
Of the 1,872 species now considered threatened in Europe, 354 are under threat from
invasive alien species. Without effective control measures, the rate of invasion and the
risks it brings to our nature and health will continue to rise.

The implementation of the EU Invasive Alien Species Regulation58 and other relevant
legislation and international agreements must also be stepped up. This should aim to
minimise, and where possible eliminate, the introduction and establishment of alien
species in the EU environment. The aim will be to manage established invasive alien
species and decrease the number of Red List species they threaten by 50%59.

                   EU Nature Restoration Plan: key commitments by 2030

1. Legally binding EU nature restoration targets to be proposed in 2021, subject to an
   impact assessment. By 2030, significant areas of degraded and carbon-rich
   ecosystems are restored; habitats and species show no deterioration in conservation
   trends and status; and at least 30% reach favourable conservation status or at least
   show a positive trend.
2. The decline in pollinators is reversed.
3. The risk and use of chemical pesticides is reduced by 50% and the use of more
   hazardous pesticides is reduced by 50%.
4. At least 10% of agricultural area is under high-diversity landscape features.
5. At least 25% of agricultural land is under organic farming management, and the
   uptake of agro-ecological practices is significantly increased.
6. Three billion new trees are planted in the EU, in full respect of ecological principles.
7. Significant progress has been made in the remediation of contaminated soil sites.
8. At least 25,000 km of free-flowing rivers are restored.

54
     Sustainable Use of Pesticides Directive (2009/128/EC).
55
     European Strategy for Plastics in a Circular Economy (COM(2018) 28).
56
     A new Circular Economy Action Plan for a cleaner and more competitive Europe (COM(2020) 98).
57
     See for example: Hulme P. (2014). Invasive species challenge the global response to emerging diseases,
     Trends in parasitology (2014) Vol. 30, Issue 6; Duscher et al. (2017).
58
     Regulation (EU) 1143/2014 on invasive alien species.
59
     Red List of the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN).

                                                        14

9. There is a 50% reduction in the number of Red List species threatened by invasive
    alien species.
10. The losses of nutrients from fertilisers are reduced by 50%, resulting in the reduction
    ofthe use of fertilisers by at least 20%.
11. Cities with at least 20,000 inhabitants have an ambitious Urban Greening Plan.
12. No chemical pesticides are used in sensitive areas such as EU urban green areas.
13. The negative impacts on sensitive species and habitats, including on the seabed
    through fishing and extraction activities, are substantially reduced to achieve good
    environmental status.
14. The by-catch of species is eliminated or reduced to a level that allows species
    recovery and conservation.

3. ENABLING TRANSFORMATIVE CHANGE

                 3.1.    A new governance framework

In the EU, there is currently no comprehensive governance framework to steer the
implementation of biodiversity commitments agreed at national, European or
international level. To address the gap, the Commission will put in place a new
European biodiversity governance framework. This will help map obligations and
commitments and set out a roadmap to guide their implementation.

As part of this new framework, the Commission will put in place a monitoring and
review mechanism. This will include a clear set of agreed indicators and will enable
regular progress assessment and set out corrective action if necessary. This mechanism
will feed the Environmental Implementation Review and contribute to the European
Semester.

The new governance framework will ensure co-responsibility and co-ownership by all
relevant actors in meeting the EU’s biodiversity commitments. It will support
administrative capacity building, transparency, stakeholder dialogue, and participatory
governance at different levels.

The Commission will assess the progress and suitability of this approach in 2023, and
consider whether a legally binding approach to governance is needed.

                 3.2.    Stepping up implementation                  and     enforcement   of   EU
                         environmental legislation

All environmental legislation relies on proper implementation and enforcement. Over the
last 30 years, the EU has put in place a solid legislative framework to protect and restore
its natural capital. However, recent evaluations show that although legislation is fit for
purpose, implementation on the ground is lagging behind60. This is having dramatic
consequences on biodiversity and comes with a substantial economic cost61. The full
implementation and enforcement of EU environmental legislation is therefore at the
heart of this strategy, for which political support and financial and human resources
will need to be prioritised.


60
     See 2015 State of Nature in the EU report (COM (2015)219).
61
     The costs of non-implementation are estimated at EUR 50 billion per year.

                                                        15

As regards the Birds and Habitats Directives, enforcement will focus on completing the
Natura 2000 network, the effective management of all sites, species-protection
provisions, and species and habitats that show declining trends. The Commission will
also ensure that environment-related legislation with an impact on biodiversity62 is better
implemented, enforced and – where necessary – reviewed and revised.

The Commission will strive to improve compliance assurance, working closely with
Member States and European networks of environmental agencies, inspectors, auditors,
police, prosecutors and judges.

In addition, the Commission will support civil society’s role as a compliance watchdog
and will engage with Member States to improve access to justice in national courts in
environmental matters for individuals and NGOs. It will also broaden standing for NGOs
by proposing a revision of the Aarhus Regulation63.

                3.3.     Building on an integrated and whole-of-society approach

              3.3.1. Business for biodiversity

In the partnership spirit of this strategy, all parts of the economy and society will have to
play their role. Industry and business have an impact on nature, but they also produce the
important innovations, partnerships and expertise that can help address biodiversity loss.

To ensure environmental and social interests are fully embedded into business strategies,
the Commission will put forward a new initiative in 2021 on sustainable corporate
governance. This initiative, which may take the form of a legislative proposal, will
address human rights and environmental duty of care and due diligence across economic
value chains in a proportionate way according to different sizes of entreprises64. This will
help ensure that shareholder and stakeholder interests are fully aligned with the
objectives set out in this strategy. In addition, in 2020, the Commission launched a
review of the reporting obligations of businesses under the Non-Financial Reporting
Directive65, with a view to improving the quality and scope of non-financial disclosures,
including on environmental aspects such as biodiversity.

Through its existing platforms66, the Commission will help to build a European
Business for Biodiversity movement, taking inspiration from recent initiatives67 and
making this movement an integral part of the European Climate Pact. Particular attention
will be paid to measures to incentivise and eliminate barriers for the take-up of nature-
based solutions, as these can lead to significant business and employment opportunities
in various sectors68 and are the key to innovation for economic or societal needs that rely
on nature.


62
     Such as the Directives on Environmental Impact Assessment (2014/52/EU), on Strategic Environmental
     Assessment (2001/42/EC), on Environmental Liability (2004/35/CE) and on Environmental Crime
     (2008/99/EC).
63
     https://ec.europa.eu/environment/aarhus/
64
     Study on due diligence requirements through the supply chain – Final Report.
65
     Directive 2014/95/EU amending Directive 2013/34/EU as regards disclosure of non-financial and
     diversity information by certain large undertakings.
66
     Such as the EU Business @ Biodiversity Platform (B@B).
67
     See for example Business for Nature or One Planet Business for Biodiversity.
68
     BenDor et al. (2015), Estimating the Size and Impact of the Ecological Restoration Economy.

                                                      16

              3.3.2. Investments, pricing and taxation

Tackling biodiversity loss and restoring ecosystems will require significant public and
private investments at national and European level. This will mean making the most of
all relevant EU programmes and financing instruments. The Commission will strengthen
its biodiversity proofing framework69, inter alia by using in an appropriate way the
criteria established under the EU taxonomy, to ensure that EU funding supports
biodiversity-friendly investments.

To meet the needs of this strategy, including investment priorities for Natura 2000 and
green infrastructure, at least €20 billion a year70 should be unlocked for spending on
nature. This will require mobilising private and public funding at national and EU
level71, including through a range of different programmes in the next long-term EU
budget. Moreover, as nature restoration will make a major contribution to climate
objectives, a significant proportion of the 25% of the EU budget dedicated to climate
action will be invested on biodiversity and nature-based solutions.

Under Invest EU, a dedicated natural-capital and circular-economy initiative will be
established to mobilise at least €10 billion over the next 10 years, based on public/private
blended finance. Nature and biodiversity is also a priority for the European Green Deal
Investment Plan. To help unlock the investment needed, the EU must provide long-term
certainty for investors and help embed sustainability in the financial system. The EU
sustainable finance taxonomy will help guide investment towards a green recovery and
the deployment of nature-based solutions. In 2021, the Commission will adopt a
delegated act under the Taxonomy Regulation72 to establish a common classification of
economic activities that substantially contribute to protecting and restoring biodiversity
and ecosystems. This will be further supported by a Renewed Sustainable Finance
Strategy later this year which will help ensure that the financial system contributes to
mitigating existing and future risks to biodiversity and better reflect how biodiversity
loss affects companies’ profitability and long-term prospects73.

The Commission will further promote tax systems and pricing that reflect environmental
costs, including biodiversity loss. This should encourage changes in national fiscal
systems to shift the tax burden from labour to pollution, under-priced resources, and
other environmental externalities. The ‘user pays’ and ‘polluter pays’ principles have
to be applied to prevent and correct environmental degradation.

Public authorities’ purchasing power represents 14% of EU GDP and can serve as a
powerful driver of demand for the products and services of companies that invest in or
contribute to nature-based solutions. To tap into this potential, when proposing further


69
     See Common framework and guidance documents for biodiversity proofing of the EU budget.
70
     The cost estimate is based on the 2018 Impact Assessment of the LIFE Regulation (SWD(2018) 292), a
     Study on the costs of implementing the Target 2 of the EU Biodiversity Strategy to 2020 and data
     submitted by 16 Member States under Article 8(1) of the Habitats Directive. The Commission will
     update the estimate, notably based on Member States’ Prioritised Action Frameworks under the
     Habitats Directive.
71
     Including the Common Agricultural Policy, Cohesion Policy funds, Horizon Europe, the European
     Maritime and Fisheries Fund, LIFE and external action funds.
72
     See EU taxonomy for sustainable activities.
73
     World Wildlife Fund (2019), The Nature of Risk – A Framework for Understanding Nature-Related
     Risk to Business.

                                                      17

legislation and guidance on green public procurement, the Commission will integrate
criteria and monitoring to boost nature-based solutions.

               3.3.3. Measuring and integrating the value of nature

Biodiversity considerations need to be better integrated into public and business decision-
making at all levels. Building on existing work74, the Commission will develop in 2021
methods, criteria and standards to describe the essential features of biodiversity, its
services, values, and sustainable use.

These will include measuring the environmental footprint of products and
organisations on the environment, including through life-cycle approaches and natural
capital accounting. In this context, the Commission will support the establishment of an
international natural capital accounting initiative.

               3.3.4. Improving knowledge, education and skills

The fight against biodiversity loss must be underpinned by sound science. Investing in
research, innovation and knowledge exchange will be key to gathering the best data and
developing the best nature-based solutions. Research and innovation can test and develop
how to prioritise ‘green’ over ‘grey’ solutions and help the Commission to support
investments in nature-based solutions, such as in old-industrialised, low-income or disaster-
hit areas.

The new Skills Agenda will play a key role in the transition to a green economy and the
fight against biodiversity loss, focusing on training and reskilling of the workforce across
a wide range of sectors.

The future Horizon Europe programme will include a long-term strategic research
agenda for biodiversity, including a science policy mechanism for research-based
options for ratcheting up the implementation of biodiversity commitments, with
increased funding. Horizon Europe’s Missions75 will significantly contribute to filling
knowledge gaps and finding solutions to improve the health of ecosystems and their
contribution to human health.

In parallel, the Commission will promote and facilitate partnerships, including a
dedicated Biodiversity Partnership, to make the bridge between science, policy and
practice and make nature-based solutions a reality on the ground. The Commission will
also establish in 2020 a new Knowledge Centre for Biodiversity in close cooperation
with the European Environment Agency. The Centre will: (i) track and assess progress
by the EU and its partners including in relation to implementation of biodiversity related
international instruments; (ii) foster cooperation and partnership, including between
climate and biodiversity scientists; and (iii) underpin policy development. Moreover, the
Commission will increase its support to the Intergovernmental science-policy Platform on
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services.

To help integrate biodiversity and ecosystems into school, higher education and
professional training, the Commission will propose a Council Recommendation on

74
     SWD(2019) 305.
75
     Missions on adaptation to climate change including societal transformation, on healthy oceans, seas
     coastal and inland waters, on climate-neutral and smart cities, and on soil health and food.

                                                       18

encouraging cooperation in education for environmental sustainability in 2021. This
will provide guidance for schools and teachers on how to cooperate and exchange
experiences across Member States on biodiversity teaching. The Commission will also
provide support materials and facilitate the exchange of good practices in EU networks of
teacher-training programmes.

4. THE EUROPEAN UNION FOR AN AMBITIOUS GLOBAL BIODIVERSITY AGENDA

Biodiversity is a priority of the EU’s external action and an integral part of efforts to
meet the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. It will be mainstreamed
throughout bilateral and multilateral engagements, through the EU’s ‘Green Deal
diplomacy’, and forthcoming green alliances76. The Commission will work closely with
the European Parliament and Member States to ensure a high level of EU ambition and
mobilise all efforts for the good of the world’s biodiversity.

                4.1.     Raising the level of ambition and commitment worldwide

Protecting biodiversity is a global challenge and the next decade will be decisive. Global
efforts under the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity have largely been
insufficient. Nature cannot afford any half measures or lack of ambition.

In this spirit, the EU is ready to lead all efforts – working with like-minded partners in a
high-ambition coalition on biodiversity – to agree an ambitious new global framework
for post-2020 at the upcoming 15th Conference of the Parties to the Convention on
Biological Diversity.

With this strategy, the Commission proposes ambitious commitments for the EU to bring
to the table. The EU should also support governments and stakeholders across the globe
to significantly step up their ambition and their action.

The Commission proposes that the EU ensures that the post-2020 global framework
includes, at a minimum, the elements outlined below:

         Overarching global goals for biodiversity for 2050, in line with the United
          Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the vision of ‘living in
          harmony with nature’. The ambition should be that, by 2050, all of the world’s
          ecosystems are restored, resilient, and adequately protected. The world
          should commit to the net-gain principle to give nature back more than it takes.
          The world should commit to no human-induced extinction of species, at
          minimum where avoidable.

         Ambitious global 2030 targets in line with EU commitments in this strategy.
          These should clearly address the drivers of biodiversity loss and be specific,
          measurable, actionable, relevant and time-bound.

         A much stronger implementation, monitoring and review process. Parties
          should revise their National Biodiversity Strategies and Action Plans by the end
          of 2021, or as a minimum, submit national commitments for the most important
          targets. There should be a regular review cycle to look at progress towards the

76
     Green alliances focus on cooperation with African and other partners to implement the European Green
     Deal.

                                                       19

           targets, with the ability to ratchet up action if needed. These reviews should be
           based on an independent, science-based gap-analysis and foresight process, with
           common headline indicators for all Parties.

          An enabling framework to bring the ambition to life, across areas such as
           finance, capacity, research, innovation and technology.

          Fair and equitable sharing of the benefits from the use of genetic resources
           linked to biodiversity.

          A principle of equality. This includes respect for the rights and the full and
           effective participation of indigenous peoples and local communities. There should
           be an inclusive approach with participation of all stakeholders, including women,
           youth, civil society, local authorities, the private sector, academia and scientific
           institutions.

                  4.2.    Using external action to promote the EU’s ambition

                4.2.1. International Ocean Governance

In line with the International Ocean Governance agenda77, the EU will support the
conclusion of an ambitious legally binding agreement on marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction (BBNJ) by the end of 2020. It must set clear global
procedures for identifying, designating and effectively managing ecologically
representative marine protected areas in the high seas. It should be ratified and
implemented as quickly as possible.

The EU should also use all of its diplomatic leverage and outreach capacities to help
broker agreement on the designation of three vast Marine Protected Areas in the
Southern Ocean78, two of which were co-proposed by the EU in East Antarctica and in
the Weddell Sea. If agreed, this would constitute one of the biggest acts of nature
protection in history.

Work will continue with partner countries and regional organisations to put in place
measures to protect and sustainably use sensitive maritime ecosystems and species,
including in areas beyond national jurisdiction, with a focus on marine biodiversity
hotspots. The EU should continue supporting Small Island Developing States and other
relevant partner countries to participate in meetings of regional and global organisations
and bodies, and to implement relevant international commitments and regulations.

The EU will apply zero tolerance towards illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing and will combat overfishing, including through WTO negotiations on a global
agreement to ban harmful fisheries subsidies.

In international negotiations, the EU should advocate that marine minerals in the
international seabed area cannot be exploited before the effects of deep-sea mining on
the marine environment, biodiversity and human activities have been sufficiently
researched, the risks are understood and the technologies and operational practices are
able to demonstrate no serious harm to the environment, in line with the precautionary

77
     International ocean governance agenda: an agenda for the future (JOIN(2016) 49).
78
     In the framework of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources.

                                                        20

principle79 and taking into account the call of the European Parliament 80. In parallel, the
EU will continue to fund research on the impact of deep-sea mining activities and on
environmentally-friendly technologies. The EU should also advocate for more
transparency in international bodies such as the International Seabed Authority.

               4.2.2. Trade policy

Trade policy will actively support and be part of the ecological transition. In this
spirit, the Commission will ensure full implementation and enforcement of the
biodiversity provisions in all trade agreements, including through the EU Chief Trade
Enforcement Officer. The Commission will better assess the impact of trade agreements
on biodiversity, with follow-up action to strengthen the biodiversity provisions of
existing and new agreements if relevant. The Commission will also present in 2021 a
legislative proposal and other measures to avoid or minimise the placing of products
associated with deforestation or forest degradation on the EU market81, and to promote
forest-friendly imports and value chains. The Commission will take a number of steps to
crack down on illegal wildlife trade. This trade contributes to the depletion or
extinction of entire species, is the world’s fourth most lucrative black market and is
thought to be one of the causes behind the emergence of zoonotic diseases. It is a human,
economic and environmental duty to dismantle it.

With this in mind, the Commission will revise the EU Action Plan against Wildlife
Trafficking in 2021 and propose a further tightening of the rules on EU ivory trade
later this year. It will explore a possible revision of the Environmental Crime Directive,
including by looking at expanding its scope and introducing specific provisions for types
and levels of criminal sanctions. It will consider strengthening the coordinating and
investigative capacities of the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) to work with
Member States and non-EU countries to prevent illicit trade and the entry of illicit
products into the Single Market.

The Commission will continue to engage with partner countries to ensure a smooth and
fair transition, mobilising in particular Aid for Trade to ensure that partners reap the
benefits of biodiversity-friendly trade.

               4.2.3. International cooperation, neighbourhood policy and resource
                      mobilisation

Delivering an ambitious post-2020 global biodiversity framework will require greater
cooperation with partners, increased support and financing and phasing out of subsidies
harmful to biodiversity. In the last decade, the EU and its Member States collectively
upheld their commitment to double financial flows to developing countries for
biodiversity82. The EU is ready to continue working with its partners and further
increase its support post-2020. This will be part of its work on biodiversity conservation,
restoration, sustainable use and mainstreaming in all development and partnership
79
     Under Article 191.2 TFEU, the Union policy on the environment shall aim at a high level of protection
     and shall be based on the precautionary principle.
80
     European Parliament Resolution on international ocean governance (2017/2055(INI)).
81
     In line with the Commission Communication on Stepping up EU Action to Protect and Restore the
     World’s Forests (COM(2019) 352).
82
     Including international financing where biodiversity is the principal objective and where it is a
     significant secondary objective, in line with CBD COP11 Decision XI/4 and EU and Member States
     financial reports submitted to the Convention on Biological Diversity in 2015 and 2018.

                                                        21

policies. In addition, by integrating policy coherence for sustainable development in all
its policies, the EU will reduce the pressure on biodiversity worldwide. In all of its
international cooperation, the EU should promote sustainable agricultural and fisheries
practices and actions to protect and restore the world’s forests. Particular attention will
also be paid to sustainable water resource management, the restoration of degraded land,
and the protection and restoration of biodiverse areas with high ecosystem services and
climate mitigation potential. A better protection of natural ecosystems, coupled with
efforts to reduce wildlife trade and consumption, will also help prevent and build up
resilience to possible future diseases and pandemics. The EU will enhance its support to
global efforts to apply the One Health approach83, which recognises the intrinsic
connection between human health, animal health and healthy resilient nature.

The EU will step up support to partner countries across the world to achieve the new
global targets, fight environmental crime, and tackle the drivers of biodiversity loss. In
Africa, the EU will launch the NaturAfrica initiative to protect wildlife and key
ecosystems while offering opportunities in green sectors for local populations. Similar
projects will be developed in other regions. The EU will also support the Western
Balkans and EU Neighbourhood countries in their efforts to protect biodiversity.

In all of its work, the EU will strengthen the links between biodiversity protection and
human rights, gender, health, education, conflict sensitivity, the rights-based approach,
land tenure and the role of indigenous peoples and local communities.

As part of its global efforts, the EU will promote biodiversity coalitions with partners and
civil society around the world. For example, in March 2020, the Commission launched
the Global Biodiversity Coalition of national parks, aquariums, botanic gardens, zoos,
natural history and sciencemuseums to help raise awareness around the world on the need
to protect and nurture biodiversity. The Commission will consider launching or joining
other High Ambition Coalitions to help develop the post-2020 framework.

5. CONCLUSION

Protecting and restoring biodiversity is the only way to preserve the quality and
continuity of human life on Earth. The commitments proposed in this strategy pave the
way for ambitious and necessary changes – changes that will ensure the wellbeing and
economic prosperity of present and future generations in a healthy environment. The
implementation of these commitments will take into account the diversity of challenges
across sectors, regions and Member States, recognise the need to ensure social justice,
fairness and inclusiveness in line with the European Pillar of Social Rights, and will
require a sense of responsibility and strong joint efforts from the EU, its Member States,
stakeholders and citizens.

The Commission invites the European Parliament and the Council to endorse this
strategy ahead of the 15th Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological
Diversity. To ensure full political ownership of this strategy, the Commission will
suggest a standing progress point at the Council and at the European Parliament. It will
review the strategy by 2024 to assess progress and whether further action is needed to
meet its objectives.


83
     https://www.who.int/features/qa/one-health/en/

                                                      22

